21st i believe in a conference room on the first floor of the new reed arena chatting with mary helen bowers and mary helen use your mic now let's be sure they're both working this is mary helen bowers strangers may use this material in decades to come so would you begin please by giving a
Brief biographical summary before you came to Texas A&M in 1964.
1964.
Well, I'm a native Texan, grew up, was born and reared in Beeville, Texas, South Texas.
I moved here in 1964 as a young faculty wife.
I was 24 years old.
I had one very small son at the time.
I later had two additional sons, reared them here, and it was a great place to raise kids.
I was fortunate, I think, to be able to stay home with them until my youngest son entered school, and by that time I was doing about 30 hours a week of volunteer work, church work, and other things, and it occurred to me that somebody might pay me for
what I was doing and started looking for a job on campus and was fortunate enough to find one and started working here in 1973.
Right.
Now, you came to A&M because your husband was employed.
A new faculty member.
New faculty member in journalism.
And you all moved here from Lubbock.
No.
We moved here from Media, Pennsylvania.
You had gone to Tech.
Well, I went to Texas Tech.
And he came in journalism, and for trivia information, what was his beginning salary?
Here?
Here.
Do you remember?
I actually don't.
If I were going to have to make a guess, I want to think it was like $9,000 a year or something like that.
And do you remember what his rank was?
Oh, yes.
He was an associate professor.
And we're not going to concentrate on the journalism faculty very much, but where was journalism housed then?
In the basement of Nagel Hall.
And when one of his colleagues joined the department a couple of years later, on his very first day here, a skunk got caught in the window well right outside Skip Lebo's office.
And the faculty when your husband got here in journalism was how many?
There were...
three of them, and one of them was on leave.
And a full class load for a faculty member, David taught four courses.
You had not, you were not thoroughly familiar with College Station when you all moved.
No, I'd never been here.
Describe your first impressions of College Station Bryan.
Well, the big decision then was whether you wanted to live in Bryan or College Station.
College Station even was considered far more liberal than Bryan.
There were not as many places to live in College Station.
There had been some fairly recent housing developments in Bryan, but not as many.
there were almost no houses to rent uh we looked at my mother and i came up about a month and a half or two months before we moved i was visiting in beeville and we looked at i believe there were three rental houses period and none of them were what we had in mind at all
When we moved here, we got very, very fortunate in that we showed up and were in a motel room.
We thought the furniture was coming three days later, and we had three days to find a place to live in August.
And David had gone down to deposit a check at the bank to pay the movers.
And the lady at the bank heard we were looking for a house.
She told a real estate agent who came in after us.
The real estate agent knocked on the motel room door, said, I've got a house for you.
And we bought the house.
The people had lived in it 18 months.
All they wanted out of it was a real estate fee.
We picked up the payments.
We moved in that house for $750.
Signed the papers at 9 o'clock on a Saturday night in the real estate agent's office.
And then that couple had loaded their furniture that day, and then the four of us went swimming at the motel pool that night to celebrate.
This was in Bryan or College Station?
It was in Bryan.
And we lived there for, oh,
till 73 also.
The, how did you, you get here just before school starts.
Was there anything for any activities, as you remember, for new faculty?
Oh, yes, and for faculty-wise.
It was still had many aspects of a much of a small school, and it was a small school, and that the social life more nearly revolved around.
There was always, and for a number of years, I'm not sure when they stopped it,
I was actually kind of relieved, but there was always a reception held at the start of school, and we thought at least that it was a command performance that everyone would show up and go through this humongously long receiving line.
shaking hands with every all of the with the president the vice presidents the deans and all of their wives and uh there were literally it seemed like 20 30 people in the line then there was the social club which was essentially the faculty wives club technically you could be a professional female employee and be a member but i don't think there were any
and at that time at least people wore hats and gloves to those meetings and gee they were boring now they did have special interest groups those were a lot more fun and one of them was for newcomers which was primarily a younger group and those were a lot more fun and they had a bridge group and i thoroughly enjoyed that but i think you tended to kind of make friends in the smaller groups missed out if you didn't
Did you participate in the newcomers?
Oh, yeah.
And did it help a newcomer?
Very much.
Make friends and so on?
It was that, and like I say, in the bridge group and things like that, they were helpful.
Between that and church and neighbors, it was pretty easy to make friends, even though David was in a very small department, and we didn't have, that was an unusual group.
Did the department do anything socially?
Occasionally.
There were efforts made from time to time.
What did you get the impression was almost a command involvement for a young faculty wife?
You needed to be nice to the department head's wife and to the dean and the dean's wife.
Beyond that, you could pretty much be anonymous if you wanted to, unless you met them somewhere else.
Now, Skip Lebo was the department head then?
Not at that time.
Skip came in later.
All right.
Who was he?
Delbert McGuire.
Yes.
He was comparatively low-key, wasn't he?
Delbert... Haskell, when are you turning this over to anyone, the tape?
I mean, that's, you know, it's not opinion.
Mention, summarize the story about...
Professor McGuire's resignation?
The dean at that time was Frank W. R. Hubert, who was an interesting fellow for lots of reasons, and I still consider him a friend.
We had realized, my husband had realized, that Dean Hubert was on the department head's case big time.
He was not approving anything that was proposed.
He was being particularly hard on the department.
He was asking for things that were difficult.
I mean, he was just really on it.
And Dr. Hubert later told the story that Delbert McGuire came in to complain to him.
and legitimately of all the hardships he was having to endure because for reasons he didn't understand and he finally told hubert that well i came in here to tell you i was thinking about resigning and dean hubert said i accept and he reached in his desk drawer and pulled out a written letter of resignation handed it to delbert with a pen and said sign it and he did and that was it um
Let's see, you have a one-year-old when you all arrive, you have a one-year-old?
I have a 10-month-old, yes.
10-month-old.
And your husband teaching four courses, four sections, and probably four preparations.
Four different courses.
Yeah, four different courses.
So he's busy.
The journalism department's too small to have multiple sections of a course.
What was a typical day for you that first year, a typical work day?
What time were you off?
We would get up about 6.30 to 7.
I would cook breakfast, it seemed, for about an hour.
It got worse when I had two smaller ones.
We would, we had one car.
Generally, David would take the car and go to campus, and I was left with the baby to figure out what I was going to do that day.
Keeping house for three people, as I learned when it was five people, isn't difficult.
Play with the baby.
It was a wonderful time.
Talk to friends on the telephone, visit if I had somewhere I wanted to go, needed to do.
I had several neat babysitters I could hire for 50 cents an hour.
Were there some people that you now can look back and realize were very thoughtful those first two or three years?
Oh, surely.
Surely.
One was Arla Gammon, who lived down the street from me.
And when she had found out that I was Presbyterian, she got up a coffee of Presbyterian women in the group.
And we used to play bridge together and chat and all this sort of thing.
There were
There were others that I met through, primarily through church.
Some I met through political activities.
I got involved in that fairly soon.
And it was a nice life.
When did you start taking classes?
I signed up for my first class in September of 1965.
65.
Women had been officially admitted
62.
But still there, was there still the requirement for undergraduates that you had to have an A&M?
For graduates and undergraduates.
You had to have a husband or father who was on the faculty, staff, or student.
And I signed up for my very first graduate class in English.
It was a poetry course taught by Mr. Carol Laverty.
And I thoroughly enjoyed it.
as you went down the hallway about how many women did you see?
Very, very few.
There was a ladies' room in the academic building where the class was taught.
I had been told that would be a problem in some buildings.
The...
I will never forget going to class my first day.
At this point, I was 25, almost 25.
I was still 24.
First day of class, I felt like I was an undergraduate again.
I mean, I was taken off the class and feeling really good about it, excited about it, and feeling very young again.
And I was stopped in the hall by a freshman in the corps on my way to class who said, ma'am, can you tell me where English 103 section is?
Which immediately made me feel ancient.
call me ma'am.
During those first two or three years that you took any courses, how do you now think women were treated in general?
Female students I'm talking about, not
I'm not sure I'm a good person to ask there.
I was taking graduate classes in the English department.
There were several graduate students, females, in the English department, most of them faculty wives.
We were treated quite well.
First place, the English department is
gentlemen are on the faculty there.
They were not about, and besides that, they were glad to have the graduate students.
I now know, very glad to have them.
It was no problem whatsoever.
The only concern, and at the time I thought it was funny,
was that when you registered you had to sign the piece of paper that essentially said and this is almost a direct quote that if the admission policy was changed so as not to admit women at all that you would voluntarily withdraw that you would not file a lawsuit against the university and i signed it because that was the only way that i figured dean heaton was going to let you get registered all right so you were not at all the victim of any uh inappropriate
I might have been if I'd been 18, but not at 25.
So who babysat while you were in classes?
Oh, I had a deal worked out.
I had several babysitters.
Primarily one very, very nice lady named Mrs. Webb, who helped raise my small children at the time.
and uh and you you're taking these courses you're you're doing you're a part-time student for a number of years and you get your degree in what okay i later changed i stopped taking courses with when there were three very small boys and started again in after i started working out here
started taking one and sometimes two courses a semester.
Got my master's degree in educational administration.
I started working on a doctoral degree in business administration, took all of the courses for an MBA, did all the coursework for the PhD, and then chickened out when it came to the comprehensive two-day written examinations over coursework that I'd taken over a seven-year period.
They told me I could go ahead and pay the fee and get the MBA, and I said, why?
No interest.
So you joined the workforce out here before you...
Started seriously on the degree.
And when was that?
I started working out here in 73.
And that was where?
Admissions and Records.
My title then was Information Representative One.
And that was, who was the head person?
Edwin H. Cooper.
Describe what it was like to work in that group.
Well, I was absolutely convinced that the entire campus revolved around admissions and records.
In addition to Cooper, who had an unusual background for admissions and records, with a degree in wildlife science and then having been assistant to both President Rutter and to President Williams, Ed had a
had more contacts than you were normally going to see in a situation like that the president still called on him for a number of special things i i felt fortunate in that he was nice to work for he was the kind of fellow who would give you an assignment and essentially let you know come back and see me if you have problems but you're on your own and i enjoyed that
What were your primary duties?
My primary duties at that point were to edit the university catalog, two of them, get them out every year, to serve as secretary to the curriculum committee, university curriculum committee, and recording secretary for the academic council, and other duties as assigned.
And those were generally the ones I liked best.
What was it like to edit the catalog?
I've never chatted with a catalog editor.
Well, I had never edited one.
And my predecessor and I, we had a little overlap, so I learned the basics of it, pretty much what was involved.
It was a logistical challenge.
because each and every bit of it had to go out to the departments and so forth.
You quickly learned that some departments were better run than others as far as getting their
stuff done.
Since this is in the past and a lot of water has passed under the bridge, which were the departments that got their stuff in quickest best and which ones were the least reliable?
At that time, the ones that you could depend on absolutely the most were animal science, civil engineering, and mathematics.
and mathematics was never a problem.
Animal science was a problem only because of a editing thing.
The ones that were most difficult to deal with were English and everything at Galveston and industrial engineering.
They got it in slow and
Oh, the industrial engineers my first year.
They sent all of their material for the catalog, including a degree program called cybernetic engineering.
And at that time, and it's not much different than it is now, any new degree program had to be approved by the college, by the university curriculum committee, by the academic council, by the board of regents, and then by the coordinating board.
Well, I kept the minutes for two of those groups and was copied in on letters to the coordinating board frequently just so I would know the progress of it.
I spent two days looking for any record of cybernetic engineering.
Couldn't find it.
I called the faculty member over there who had sent the material, and I said, I'm sorry, I cannot find this.
You're going to have to give me some clues to the dates.
I must have overlooked it.
He just died laughing.
And he said, Marilyn, he said, we haven't met yet, and I'll get over to meet you sometime.
He said, I told him that probably wouldn't work, but they told me you were new, and maybe they could get it through, and you would print it, and then we could start teaching it, if it was in the catalog.
And our mom had an obscenity and hung up the phone.
All right, now that's a good anecdote.
Can you remember any other anecdotes, positive or negative, about?
The English department used to edit their catalog throughout the year, their portion of the catalog, throughout the year.
And they would dispatch at random times during the year at least an associate professor, frequently a full professor, to come change a word in a course description.
And I quickly learned that the
had been that i it was pointless to suggest an alternative it was much easier on him and me both to just do it because they had already had a
long faculty meeting to come up with that single word change and that this fella might even if he agreed with me he wasn't going to subject himself to that faculty meeting again and you know so i didn't do it david for a while was on the was the journalism department's representative on the uh liberal arts curriculum committee and there was some wrangle and
at one of their meetings one time and some big discussion over what they could put in the catalog and what they couldn't and gentleman by the name of dr milton nance was presiding at the meeting and uh he kept saying talking about well i don't think the catalog editor will do this
And Bill Barzac from the English department was sitting by David at the other end of the table and kept elbowing David and said, tell him you sleep with her.
You'll get something done.
But Nance never put the two of us together.
We knew each other.
Was the catalog printed on campus?
No.
They had started printing it off campus the year before I came.
And it was printed at that time in Fort Worth.
And it was still a comparatively traditional catalog in style and manner, wasn't it?
They had jazzed it up.
I wasn't in for the redesign, but it had been jazzed up the year before.
At least the type was made a little bit larger.
The history of the university was shortened somewhat.
It had some color on the cover, some design, rather than just maroon and white.
It was printed mercifully offset instead of hot type.
And so that had been done the year before.
now you didn't uh you you didn't have pr responsibilities for well no to some extent uh we did i was responsible for all the publications done by missions and records while we didn't do quote a view book we did other publications and this sort of thing and the way
Whether I was doing any PR work or not, we all thought we were for the way Cooper operated and the things that came in through our office.
And PR described very broadly.
But we got involved in some fun things.
The centennial convocation, the inauguration of Dr. Miller, and some other smaller projects, dedication of Rutter.
Auditorium and Rudder Tower.
Summarize those as you remember them.
Which parts?
Well, all three, the centennial and the inauguration.
The centennial was a tremendous amount of fun, at least for me.
The part that I worked on, I feel sure others are going to talk about what went on through the entire year.
But the parts that I worked on were the concluding birthday celebration.
When we were 100 years old and we planned a convocation in G. Raleigh White Coliseum that included a speaker who was carefully selected.
It included representatives from learned societies and other universities in caps and gowns and an academic procession.
We pretty much filled the old Coliseum for that.
It involved a luncheon for 1,100 people.
It involved a concert the night before.
There was a lot going on during about a two-day span.
We appointed
host for all of our out-of-town dignitaries who came, tried to match people up with some interest they had in common, whether they'd gone to the same school or whether they were in the same field or whatever.
And it was a big deal.
The next year, precisely one year later, with two months notice, we did essentially the same thing again to inaugurate Dr. Miller.
The books say you can't do it in less than six months.
We did it in two, but we had many of the same sources to go back to.
And I learned a very important lesson then.
I would have thought that the A&M Centennial would have been the biggest thing going for lots of people.
I discovered that the inauguration of a president creates far more excitement, attracts far more people.
who want to be involved in it.
It's politics, and that's all there is to it.
All right.
If we were today making a decision and there was a new president, do you think it would be prudent today to have a big ceremony?
It obviously costs some money, but do you think the plus and minus, do you think it would be a good thing?
Yes.
It's kind of hard to draw attention to academic endeavors.
It's far easier to draw attention to problems and to football teams and to new discoveries.
But our day-to-day reason for being here, educating kids, the basic research, our reason for being here.
It's hard to draw attention to it, both within the general public and the media.
And I remember
telling Jarvis Miller during some of that planning when he said, oh, now let's don't do that.
You know, we're spending too much money.
Dr. Miller, we're buying publicity for A&M, good publicity.
And it does do that.
It gets everybody's attention of what's going on.
And yes, you inaugurate a president, but you sure have a chance to talk about what's being done in the biology department or the
geophysics department or whatever at the same time and to talk about good news.
And as I remember those years I don't remember any criticism of either of those big events.
Let's back up and talk about Jack Williams a bit.
Did you have any interaction with Dr. Williams and his staff?
Yes, I did.
And primarily, again, because I worked for Ed and because of the Academic Council.
Most of my interaction was as an observer.
The longest conversation I ever had with Dr. Williams was after he was no longer president.
But the...
I was pretty much in awe of him.
I drafted a fair number of letters that he would send down to Admissions and Records, primarily things that had to do with admissions or
had to do with financial aid because that was part of admissions and records at the time.
And he would always send a copy back.
I can remember because he was such a beautiful writer himself how proud I would be if nothing was changed or if it was only a single word or two that was changed.
I was able to observe him in academic council meetings
I quickly learned that getting him to schedule one was like pulling teeth.
He hated to schedule them, and yet once he got there, he didn't want to leave.
He was back, it seemed to me at the time, that he was back with his kind of people and he enjoyed it.
I thought he made a mistake at the time, and I
when he would sometimes make fun in a group that size.
And that academic council was about 150 people.
You'd hear him make fun of regents.
You'd hear him make fun of legislators.
I thought at the time that was probably a mistake, that unless he knew those 150 people a lot better than I did.
But he was so quick on his feet.
Some years ago, A&M stopped or started giving finals to graduating seniors, but at that time we didn't.
And I never will forget Dr. Herman Hartley questioning that at an academic council meeting, bringing it up that it wasn't right.
And Dr. Williams shut him up in a few well-chosen words, something to the effect that, Dr. Hartley, when I first came to this institution,
five years ago or whatever, and learned of this practice not to make graduating seniors take final exams, I thought it was one of the more humane things we did.
And that was the end of that discussion.
When I first got here, I thought it was a bad idea, too.
I later decided I liked it very much.
Because somebody asked me how many people change their grade point ratio with one set of finals.
And by having those people graduate the week before finals, it meant that all undergraduates were on the campus.
and freshmen, sophomores, and juniors could go to commencement and be a part of it.
Whereas today, they're gone.
They're gone.
And I'm assuming that for the registrar's office, it was good to have those seniors gone and out of the way and to concentrate on other things.
On the final.
But for those of us that had never done it that way, our tendency was to think that